Moritzlaurer/synthetic data save costs (#1812)
huggingface/blog: synthetic-data-save-costs.md

Its essential to spend some time annotating texts to get a feeling for the data and its ambiguities. You will quickly learn that the model made some mistakes, but there will also be several examples where the correct label is unclear and some texts where you agree more with the decision of the LLM than with the experts who created the dataset. These mistakes and ambiguities are a normal part of dataset creation. In fact, there are actually only very few real-world tasks where the human expert baseline is 100% agreement. It’s an old insight recently “rediscovered” by the machine learning literature that human data is a faulty gold standard ([Krippendorf 2004](https://books.google.de/books/about/Content_Analysis.html?id=q657o3M3C8cC&redir_esc=y) , [Hosking et al. 2024](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2309.16349.pdf)). 

> After less than an hour in the the annotation interface, we have gained a better understanding of our data and corrected some mistakes. For reproducibility and to demonstrate the quality of purely synthetic data, however, we continue using the uncleaned LLM annotations in the next step. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After less than an hour in the annotation interface, we gained a better understanding of our data and corrected some mistakes. However, for reproducibility and to demonstrate the quality of purely synthetic data, we continue using the uncleaned LLM annotations in the next step.
```

### 3.3 Tuning your efficient & specialized model with AutoTrain

> So far, this has been a standard workflow of prompting an LLM through an API and validating the outputs. Now comes the additional step to enable significant resource savings: we fine-tune a smaller, more efficient and specialized LM on the LLM’s synthetic data. This process is also called “distillation”, where the output from a larger model (the “teacher”) is used to train a smaller model (the “student”). While this sounds fancy, it essentially only means that we take our original `text` from the dataset and treat the predictions from the LLM as our `labels` for fine-tuning. If you have trained a classifier before, you know that these are the only two columns you need to train a classifier, be it with `transformers`, `sklearn` or any other library. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far, this has been a standard workflow of prompting an LLM through an API and validating the outputs. Now comes the additional step to enable significant resource savings: we fine-tune a smaller, more efficient, and specialized LM on the LLM's synthetic data. This process is also called "distillation", where the output from a larger model (the "teacher") is used to train a smaller model (the "student"). While this sounds fancy, it essentially only means that we take our original `text` from the dataset and treat the predictions from the LLM as our `labels` for fine-tuning. If you have trained a classifier before, you know these are the only two columns you need to train a classifier with `transformers,` `sklearn`, or any other library.
```

> To make this process even easier, we use the Hugging Face [AutoTrain](https://huggingface.co/autotrain) solution. AutoTrain is a no-code interface, which enables you to upload a `.csv` file with labelled data, which the service then uses to fine-tune a model for you automatically. This removes the need for coding or in-depth fine-tuning expertise for training your own model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use the Hugging Face [AutoTrain](https://huggingface.co/autotrain) solution to make this process even easier. AutoTrain is a no-code interface that enables you to upload a `.csv` file with labeled data, which the service then uses to fine-tune a model for you automatically. This removes the need for coding or in-depth fine-tuning expertise for training your own model.
```

> On the Hugging Face website, we first click on “Spaces” at the top and then “Create new Space”. We then select “Docker” > “AutoTrain” and choose a small A10G GPU, which costs $1.05 per hour. The space for AutoTrain will then initialize. We can then upload or synthetic training data and expert test data via the interface and adjust the different fields as shown in the screenshot below. Once everything is filled in, we can click on “Start Training” and you can follow the training process in the Space’s logs. Training a small RoBERTa-base model (~0.13 B parameters) on just 1811 data points is very fast and should not take more than a few minutes. Once training is done, the model is automatically uploaded to your HF profile. The Space stops once training is finished and the whole process should not take longer than 15 minutes and cost less than $1. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the Hugging Face website, we first click on "Spaces" at the top and then "Create new Space". We then select "Docker"> "AutoTrain" and choose a small A10G GPU, which costs $1.05 per hour. The Space for AutoTrain will then initialize. We can then upload our synthetic training data and expert test data via the interface and adjust the different fields, as shown in the screenshot below. Once everything is filled in, we can click on "Start Training" and you can follow the training process in the Space's logs. Training a small RoBERTa-base model (~0.13 B parameters) on just 1811 data points is very fast and should not take more than a few minutes. Once training is done, the model is automatically uploaded to your HF profile. The Space stops once training is finished, and the whole process should take at most 15 minutes and cost less than $1.
```

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/moritzlaurer/synthetic-data-save-costs/assets/176_synthetic-data-save-costs/autotrain.png?raw=true" alt="autotrain" width=95%>
</p>

> If you want, you can also use AutoTrain entirely locally on your own hardware, see our [documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/autotrain/index). Advanced users can of course always write their own training scripts, but with these default hyperparameters the results with AutoTrain should be sufficient for many classification tasks. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want, you can also use AutoTrain entirely locally on your own hardware, see our [documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/autotrain/index). Advanced users can, of course, always write their training scripts, but with these default hyperparameters, the results with AutoTrain should be sufficient for many classification tasks. 
```

### 3.4 Performance and cost comparison

How do these different approaches compare? The table below displays the trade-offs across different factors and we discuss different metrics based on our example dataset underneath. 

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/moritzlaurer/synthetic-data-save-costs/assets/176_synthetic-data-save-costs/table_pros_cons.png?raw=true" alt="table_pros_cons" width=85%>
</p>

> Let’s start with task performance. How does the small fine-tuned ~0.13B parameter RoBERTa-base model compare to the much larger LLMs? The bar chart below shows that the custom model fine-tuned on 1811 texts performs on-par with the LLMs and it would be trivial to create more training data. A small model could never compete with a much larger LLM out-of-the-box, but fine-tuning it on some high-quality data brings it to the same level of performance. The fine-tuned model can only do the one specific task we have trained it to do, but it does it very well. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's start with task performance. How does the small fine-tuned ~0.13B parameter RoBERTa-base model compare to the much larger LLMs? The bar chart below shows that the custom model fine-tuned on 1811 texts performs on par with the LLMs, and it would be trivial to create more training data. A small model could never compete with a much larger LLM out-of-the-box, but fine-tuning it on some high-quality data brings it to the same level of performance. The fine-tuned model can only do the one specific task we have trained it to do, but it does it very well.
```

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/moritzlaurer/synthetic-data-save-costs/assets/176_synthetic-data-save-costs/fig_mixtral_gpt_roberta.png?raw=true" alt="fig_mixtral_gpt_roberta" width=95%>
</p>

> Second, compute costs and inference speed. The main compute costs in practice will be inference, i.e. running the model after it has been trained. Let’s assume that in your production use-case, you need to process 1 million sentences in a given time period. Our fine-tuned RoBERTa-base model runs efficiently on a small T4 GPU with 16GB RAM, which costs $0.6 per hour on a HF Inference Endpoint. It has a latency of 0.13 seconds and a throughput of 61 sentences per second with batch_size=8. This leads to a total cost of $2.7 for processing 1 million sentences. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, compute costs and inference speed. The main compute costs in practice will be inference, i.e. running the model after it has been trained. Let's assume that in your production use case, you must process 1 million sentences in a given period. Our fine-tuned RoBERTa-base model runs efficiently on a small T4 GPU with 16GB RAM, which costs $0.6 per hour on an Inference Endpoint. It has a latency of 0.13 seconds and a throughput of 61 sentences per second with batch_size=8. This leads to a total cost of $2.7 for processing 1 million sentences. 
```

> With GPT models, we can calculate inference costs by counting tokens. Processing the tokens in 1 million sentences would cost ~$153 with GPT3.5 and ~$3061 with GPT4. The latency and throughput for these models is harder to calculate as it varies throughout the day depending on the current server load, but anyone working with GPT4 knows that latency can often be multiple seconds and is rate limited. Note that speed is an issue for any LLM (API), including open-source LLMs. Generative LLMs are simply too large to be fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With GPT models, we can calculate inference costs by counting tokens. Processing the tokens in 1 million sentences would cost ~$153 with GPT3.5 and ~$3061 with GPT4. The latency and throughput for these models are more complicated to calculate as they vary throughout the day depending on the current server load. Still, anyone working with GPT4 knows that latency can often be multiple seconds and is rate-limited. Note that speed is an issue for any LLM (API), including open-source LLMs. Generative LLMs are simply too large to be fast.
```

> Training compute costs tend to be less relevant, as LLMs can often be used out-of-the box without fine-tuning and fine-tuning costs of smaller models are relatively small (fine-tuning RoBERTa-base costs less than $1). Only in very few cases do you need to invest in pre-training a model from scratch. Training costs can become relevant when fine-tuning a larger generative LLM to specialize it in a specific generative task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Training compute costs tend to be less relevant, as LLMs can often be used out-of-the-box without fine-tuning, and the fine-tuning costs of smaller models are relatively small (fine-tuning RoBERTa-base costs less than $1). Only in very few cases do you need to invest in pre-training a model from scratch. Training costs can become relevant when fine-tuning a larger generative LLM to specialize it in a specific generative task.
```

> Third, required investments in time and expertise. This is the main strong point of LLM APIs. It is significantly easier to send instructions to an API than to collect data, fine-tune a custom model and deploy it. This is exactly where using an LLM API to create synthetic data becomes important. Creating good training data becomes significantly easier. Fine-tuning and deployment can then be handled by services like AutoTrain and dedicated Inference Endpoints. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Third, required investments in time and expertise. This is the main strong point of LLM APIs. It is significantly easier to send instructions to an API than to collect data, fine-tune a custom model, and deploy it. This is exactly where using an LLM API to create synthetic data becomes important. Creating good training data becomes significantly easier. Fine-tuning and deployment can then be handled by services like AutoTrain and dedicated Inference Endpoints.
```

Fourth, control. This is probably the main disadvantage of LLM APIs. By design, LLM APIs make you dependent on the LLM API provider. You need to send your sensitive data to someone else’s servers and you cannot control the reliability and speed of your system. Training your own model lets you choose how and where to deploy it. 

Lastly, environmental impact. One query with GPT4 is estimated to consume [roughly 0.002 KWh of energy](https://towardsdatascience.com/chatgpts-energy-use-per-query-9383b8654487). 1 million queries will therefore cost roughly 2000 KWh, which is equivalent to 865 kg of CO2, or 2218 miles driven by an average car (see [EPA equivalence calculator](https://www.epa.gov/energy/greenhouse-gas-equivalencies-calculator)). Analysing 1 million sentences with our custom model, takes roughly 4.52 hours on a T4 GPU and emits around 0.12 kg of CO2 on AWS servers in US east N. Virginia (see [ML CO2 Impact calculator](https://mlco2.github.io/impact/)). Running a general-purpose LLM like GPT4 with (allegedly) 8x220B parameters is ridiculously inefficient compared to a specialized model with ~0.13B parameters. 

## Conclusion

> We have shown the enormous benefits of using an LLM to create synthetic data to train a smaller, more efficient model. While this example only treats investor sentiment classification the same pipeline could be applied to many other tasks, from other classification tasks (e.g. customer intent detection or harmful content detection), to token-classification (e.g. named entity recognition or PII detection) to generative tasks (e.g. summarization or question answering). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have shown the enormous benefits of using an LLM to create synthetic data to train a smaller, more efficient model. While this example only treats investor sentiment classification, the same pipeline could be applied to many other tasks, from other classification tasks (e.g., customer intent detection or harmful content detection) to token classification (e.g., named entity recognition or PII detection) to generative tasks (e.g., summarization or question answering). 
```

In 2024, it has never been easier for companies to create their own efficient models, control their own data and infrastructure, reduce CO2 emissions, and save compute costs and time without having to compromise on accuracy.

> Now try it out yourself! You can find the full reproduction code for all numbers in this blog post, as well as more efficient asynchronous functions with batching for API calls in the [reproduction repository](https://github.com/MoritzLaurer/synthetic-data-blog/tree/main). We invite you to copy and adapt our code to your use-cases!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now try it out yourself! You can find the full reproduction code for all numbers in this blog post, as well as more efficient asynchronous functions with batching for API calls in the [reproduction repository](https://github.com/MoritzLaurer/synthetic-data-blog/tree/main). We invite you to copy and adapt our code to your use cases!
```

---

> title: "Synthetic data: saving money and carbon with open source" 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Synthetic data: save money, time and carbon with open source" 
```

## 3. Case study: Monitoring financial sentiment

Imagine you are a developer in a large investment firm tasked with monitoring economic news sentiment toward companies in your investment portfolio. Until recently, you had two main options:

1. You could fine-tune your own model. This requires writing annotation instructions, creating an annotation interface, recruiting (crowd) workers, introducing quality assurance measures to handle low-quality data, fine-tuning a model on this data, and deploying it.

> 2. Or you could send your data with instructions to an LLM API. You skip fine-tuning and deployment entirely, and you reduce the data creation process to writing instructions (a prompt) and sending them to an “LLM annotator” behind an API.

Reviewer 2: This is not just an annotator if I'm reading it right. In this case, isn't the LLM used for inference of the final solution?

!pip install requests  # for making API requests
!pip install scikit-learn  # for evaluation metrics
!pip install pandas  # for post-processing some data
!pip install tqdm  # for progress bars
```

We can then download the example dataset with its expert annotations.

```python
from datasets import load_dataset

dataset = load_dataset("financial_phrasebank", "sentences_allagree", split='train')

# create a new column with the numeric label verbalised as label_text (e.g. "positive" instead of "0")
label_map = {
    i: label_text 
    for i, label_text in enumerate(dataset.features["label"].names)
}

def add_label_text(example):
    example["label_text"] = label_map[example["label"]]
    return example

dataset = dataset.map(add_label_text)

print(dataset)
# Dataset({
#    features: ['sentence', 'label', 'label_text'],
#    num_rows: 2264
#})
```

Now we write a short annotation instruction tailored to the `financial_phrasebank` task and format it as an LLM prompt. This prompt is analogous to the instructions you normally provide to crowd workers.

```python
prompt_financial_sentiment = """\
You are a highly qualified expert trained to annotate machine learning training data.

> Your task is to analyze the sentiment in the TEXT below from an investor perspective and label it with only one the three labels:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your task is to analyze the sentiment in the TEXT below from an investor perspective and label it with only one of three labels:
```

positive, negative, or neutral.

Base your label decision only on the TEXT and do not speculate e.g. based on prior knowledge about a company. 

Do not provide any explanations and only respond with one of the labels as one word: negative, positive, or neutral

Examples:
Text: Operating profit increased, from EUR 7m to 9m compared to the previous reporting period.
Label: positive
Text: The company generated net sales of 11.3 million euro this year.
Label: neutral
Text: Profit before taxes decreased to EUR 14m, compared to EUR 19m in the previous period.	
Label: negative

Your TEXT to analyse:
TEXT: {text}
Label: """
```

> This annotation instruction can now be passed to an LLM API. For this example, we use `Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1` via the free HF [serverless Inference Endpoints API](https://huggingface.co/docs/api-inference/index). The API is ideal for testing popular models. We define a simple `generate_text` function for sending our prompt and data to the API. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This annotation instruction can now be passed to an LLM API. For this example, we use `Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1` via the free Hugging Face [serverless Inference Endpoints API](https://huggingface.co/docs/api-inference/index). The API is ideal for testing popular models. We define a simple `generate_text` function for sending our prompt and data to the API. 
```

```python
import os
import requests

# Choose your LLM annotator

> # find available LLMs available via the free API via:  client.list_deployed_models("text-generation-inference")

Reviewer 2: `client` not defined here, maybe link to the docs instead?

API_URL = "https://api-inference.huggingface.co/models/mistralai/Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1"

# Create a HF account to get your free token for the LLM API 
# at https://huggingface.co/settings/tokens
# Note that explicitly writing your token in scripts is not good practice. 
HF_TOKEN = os.environ["HF_TOKEN"]  

# docs on different parameters: https://huggingface.co/docs/api-inference/detailed_parameters#text-generation-task
generation_params = dict(
    top_p=0.90,
    temperature=0.8,

>     max_new_tokens=128,
> 		return_full_text=False,
> 		use_cache=False

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    max_new_tokens=128,
    return_full_text=False,
    use_cache=False
```

)

def generate_text(prompt=None, generation_params=None):
    payload = {
        "inputs": prompt, 
        "parameters": {**generation_params}
    }

>     response = requests.post(
> 				API_URL, 
> 				headers={"Authorization": f"Bearer {HF_TOKEN}"}, 
> 				json=payload
> 		)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    response = requests.post(
        API_URL, 
        headers={"Authorization": f"Bearer {HF_TOKEN}"}, 
        json=payload
    )
```

    return response.json()[0]["generated_text"]
```

As the LLM might not always return the labels in exactly the same harmonized format, we also define a short `clean_output` function, which maps the string output from the LLM to our three possible labels.  

```python
labels = ["positive", "negative", "neutral"]

def clean_output(string, random_choice=True):
    for category in labels:
        if category.lower() in string.lower():
            return category
    # if the output string cannot be mapped to one of the categories, we either return "FAIL" or choose a random label
    if random_choice:
        return random.choice(labels)
    else:
        return "FAIL"
```

> We can now send our texts to the LLM for annotation. The code below sends each text to the LLM API and maps the text output to our three clean categories. Note: iterating over each text and sending them to an API separately is inefficient in practice. APIs can process multiple texts simultaneously, and you can significantly speed up your API calls by sending batches of text to the API asynchronously. You can find optimized code in the [reproduction repository](https://github.com/MoritzLaurer/synthetic-data-blog/tree/main) of this blog post.

Reviewer 2: Do they need to worry about rate limits too?

```python
output_simple = []
for text in dataset["sentence"]:

> 	# add text into the prompt template

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # add text into the prompt template
```

    prompt_formatted = prompt_financial_sentiment.format(text=text)
    # send text to API
    output = generate_text(
        prompt=prompt_formatted, generation_params=generation_params
    )

> 	# clean output

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # clean output
```

    output_cl = clean_output(output, random_choice=True)
    output_simple.append(output_cl)
```

> Based on this output, we can now calculate metrics to see how accurately the model did the task without being trained on the task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Based on this output, we can now calculate metrics to see how accurately the model did the task without being trained on it.
```

```python
from sklearn.metrics import classification_report

def compute_metrics(label_experts, label_pred):

> 	# classification report gives us both aggregate and per-class metrics 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # classification report gives us both aggregate and per-class metrics 
```

        output_dic = process_output_cot(output)
        output_lst_step.append(output_dic["label"])

    output_cot_multiple.append(output_lst_step)
```

For each text, we now have three attempts by our LLM annotator to identify the correct label with three different reasoning paths. The code below selects the majority label from the three paths. 

```python
import pandas as pd
from collections import Counter

def find_majority(row):
    # Count occurrences
    count = Counter(row)
    # Find majority
    majority = count.most_common(1)[0]
    # Check if it's a real majority or if all labels are equally frequent
    if majority[1] > 1:
        return majority[0]
    else: # in case all labels appear with equal frequency
        return random.choice(labels)

df_output = pd.DataFrame(data=output_cot_multiple).T

df_output['label_pred_cot_multiple'] = df_output.apply(find_majority, axis=1)
```

Now, we can compare our improved LLM labels with the expert labels again and calculate metrics. 

```python
label_experts = dataset["label_text"]
label_pred_cot_multiple = df_output['label_pred_cot_multiple']

metrics_cot_multiple = compute_metrics(label_experts, label_pred_cot_multiple)
```

> CoT and SC increased performance to 94.0% accuracy and 0.94 F1 macro. We have improved performance by giving the model time to think about its label decision and giving it multiple attempts. Note that CoT and SC cost additional compute. We are essentially buying annotation accuracy with compute. 

Reviewer 2: Amazing!

What does all this mean in practice? So far, the result is just data annotated by some black box LLM. We could also only calculate metrics because we have expert annotated reference data from our example dataset. How can we trust the LLM annotations if we do not have expert annotations in a real-world scenario?

In practice, whatever annotator you use (human annotators or LLMs), you can only trust data you have validated yourself. Instructions/prompts always contain a degree of ambiguity. Even a perfectly intelligent annotator can make mistakes and must make unclear decisions when faced with often ambiguous real-world data.

Fortunately, data validation has become significantly easier over the past years with open-source tools: [Argilla](https://argilla.io/) provides a free interface for validating and cleaning unstructured LLM outputs; [LabelStudio](https://labelstud.io/) enables you to annotate data in many modalities; and [CleanLab](https://cleanlab.ai/) provides an interface for annotating and automatically cleaning structured data; for quick and simple validation, it can also be fine to just annotate in a simple Excel file. 

> It's essential to spend some time annotating texts to get a feel for the data and its ambiguities. You will quickly learn that the model made some mistakes, but there will also be several examples where the correct label is unclear and some texts where you agree more with the decision of the LLM than with the experts who created the dataset. These mistakes and ambiguities are a normal part of dataset creation. In fact, there are actually only very few real-world tasks where the human expert baseline is 100% agreement. It's an old insight recently "rediscovered" by the machine learning literature that human data is a faulty gold standard ([Krippendorf 2004](https://books.google.de/books/about/Content_Analysis.html?id=q657o3M3C8cC&redir_esc=y) , [Hosking et al. 2024](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2309.16349.pdf)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's essential to spend some time annotating texts to get a feel for the data and its ambiguities. You will quickly learn that the model made some mistakes, but there will also be several examples where the correct label is unclear and some texts where you agree more with the decision of the LLM than with the experts who created the dataset. These mistakes and ambiguities are a normal part of dataset creation. In fact, there are actually only very few real-world tasks where the human expert baseline is 100% agreement. It's an old insight recently "rediscovered" by the machine learning literature that human data is a faulty gold standard ([Krippendorf 2004](https://books.google.de/books/about/Content_Analysis.html?id=q657o3M3C8cC&redir_esc=y), [Hosking et al. 2024](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2309.16349.pdf)).
```

On the Hugging Face website, we first click on "Spaces" at the top and then "Create new Space". We then select "Docker" > "AutoTrain" and choose a small A10G GPU, which costs $1.05 per hour. The Space for AutoTrain will then initialize. We can then upload our synthetic training data and expert test data via the interface and adjust the different fields, as shown in the screenshot below. Once everything is filled in, we can click on "Start Training" and you can follow the training process in the Space's logs. Training a small RoBERTa-base model (~0.13 B parameters) on just 1811 data points is very fast and should not take more than a few minutes. Once training is done, the model is automatically uploaded to your HF profile. The Space stops once training is finished, and the whole process should take at most 15 minutes and cost less than $1.

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/176_synthetic-data-save-costs/autotrain.png" alt="autotrain" width=95%>

> </p>

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to see what's the final accuracy of the classifier we trained.

How do these different approaches compare? The table below displays the trade-offs across different factors and we discuss different metrics based on our example dataset underneath. 

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/moritzlaurer/synthetic-data-save-costs/assets/176_synthetic-data-save-costs/table_pros_cons.png?raw=true" alt="table_pros_cons" width=85%>
</p>

Let's start with task performance. How does the small fine-tuned ~0.13B parameter RoBERTa-base model compare to the much larger LLMs? The bar chart below shows that the custom model fine-tuned on 1811 texts performs on par with the LLMs, and it would be trivial to create more training data. A small model could never compete with a much larger LLM out-of-the-box, but fine-tuning it on some high-quality data brings it to the same level of performance. The fine-tuned model can only do the one specific task we have trained it to do, but it does it very well.

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/176_synthetic-data-save-costs/fig_mixtral_gpt_roberta.png" alt="fig_mixtral_gpt_roberta" width=95%>
</p>

> Second, compute costs and inference speed. The main compute costs in practice will be inference, i.e. running the model after it has been trained. Let's assume that in your production use case, you need to process 1 million sentences in a given time period. Our fine-tuned RoBERTa-base model runs efficiently on a small T4 GPU with 16GB RAM, which costs $0.6 per hour on an [Inference Endpoint](https://ui.endpoints.huggingface.co/). It has a latency of 0.13 seconds and a throughput of 61 sentences per second with batch_size=8. This leads to a total cost of $2.7 for processing 1 million sentences. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Second, compute costs and inference speed. The main compute costs in practice will be inference, i.e. running the model after it has been trained. Let's assume that in your production use case, you need to process 1 million sentences in a given time period. Our fine-tuned RoBERTa-base model runs efficiently on a small T4 GPU with 16GB RAM, which costs $0.6 per hour on an [Inference Endpoint](https://ui.endpoints.huggingface.co/). It has a latency of 0.13 seconds and a throughput of 61 sentences per second with `batch_size=8`. This leads to a total cost of $2.7 for processing 1 million sentences. 
```

(or "with a batch size of 8" if you prefer text)

With GPT models, we can calculate inference costs by counting tokens. Processing the tokens in 1 million sentences would cost ~$153 with GPT3.5 and ~$3061 with GPT4. The latency and throughput for these models are more complicated to calculate as they vary throughout the day depending on the current server load. Anyone working with GPT4 knows, however, that latency can often be multiple seconds and is rate limited. Note that speed is an issue for any LLM (API), including open-source LLMs. Many generative LLMs are simply too large to be fast.

> Training compute costs tend to be less relevant, as LLMs can often be used out-of-the-box without fine-tuning, and the fine-tuning costs of smaller models are relatively small (fine-tuning RoBERTa-base costs less than $1). Only in very few cases do you need to invest in pre-training a model from scratch. Training costs can become relevant when fine-tuning a larger generative LLM to specialize it in a specific generative task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Training compute costs tend to be less relevant, as LLMs can often be used out-of-the-box without fine-tuning, and the fine-tuning costs of smaller models are relatively small (fine-tuning RoBERTa-base costs less than $1). Only in very few cases you need to invest in pre-training a model from scratch. Training costs can become relevant when fine-tuning a larger generative LLM to specialize it in a specific generative task.
```

authors:
- user: MoritzLaurer
---

# Synthetic data: save money, time and carbon with open source <!-- omit in toc -->

## tl;dr <!-- omit in toc -->

Should you fine-tune your own model or use an LLM API? Creating your own model puts you in full control but requires expertise in data collection, training, and deployment. LLM APIs are much easier to use but force you to send your data to a third party and create costly dependencies on LLM providers. This blog post shows how you can combine the convenience of LLMs with the control and efficiency of customized models.

In a case study on identifying investor sentiment in the news, we show how to use an open-source LLM to create synthetic data to train your customized model in a few steps. Our resulting custom RoBERTa model can analyze a large news corpus for around $2.7 compared to $3061 with GPT4; emits around 0.12 kg CO2 compared to very roughly 735 to 1100 kg CO2 with GPT4; with a latency of 0.13 seconds compared to often multiple seconds with GPT4; while performing on par with GPT4 at identifying investor sentiment (both 94% accuracy and 0.94 F1 macro).

<p align="center">

>     <img src="https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/moritzlaurer/synthetic-data-save-costs/assets/176_synthetic-data-save-costs/table_pros_cons.png?raw=true" alt="table_pros_cons" width=85%>

Reviewer 2: As Omar mentioned, this should preferably go to the documentation images dataset. In any case, if it lived here it shouldn't point to a `blob`, but use `/blog/assets/...` instead :)
